Using rules for
typical transaction logic (multi-table derivations, constraints) is

| Rule-based Logic is | Because |
| ------------- | ------------- |
| **Concise**  | [5 spreadsheet-like rules](by-rules) represent the same logic as [hundreds](by-code) of lines of code|
| **Performant** | SQLs are pruned and minimized |
| **High Quality** | Rules are automatically re-used over all transactions, minimizing missed corner-cases|
| **Agile** | Rule execution is automatically re-ordered per dependencies, simplifying iteration cycles |

### Installation
Using your IDE or command line: 
```
git clone
cd python-rules
virtualenv venv
source venv/bin/activate
pip install -r requirements.txt
```
### Background
The subject database is an adaption of nw,
with a few rollup columns added.
For those not familiar, this is basically
Customers, Orders, OrderDetails and Products.

#### Architecture
The logic engine is based on sqlalchemy `before_flush` events on
`Mapped Tables.`  Logging shows which rules execute,
and you can set breakpoints in formula/constraint/action rules
expressed in Python.

Logic does not apply to updates outside 
sqlalchemy, or to sqlalchemy batch updates or unmapped tables.

#### Logic Specifications
Logic is expressed as spreadsheet-like rules as shown below.  
```python
Logic.constraint_rule(validate="Customer",
                      as_condition="row.Balance <= row.CreditLimit")
Logic.sum_rule(derive="Customer.Balance", as_sum_of="OrderList.AmountTotal",
               where="row.ShippedDate is None")

Logic.sum_rule(derive="Order.AmountTotal", as_sum_of="OrderDetailList.Amount")

Logic.formula_rule(derive="OrderDetail.Amount",
                   as_exp="row.UnitPrice * row.Quantity")
Logic.copy_rule(derive="OrderDetail.UnitPrice", from_parent="ProductOrdered.UnitPrice")
```
The specification addresses around a
dozen transactions.  Here we look at 2 simple examples:
* **Add Order (Check Credit) -** enter an order/orderdetails,
and rollup to AmountTotal / Balance to check CreditLimit
* **Ship / Unship an Order (Adjust Balance) -** when an Order's DateShippped
is changed, adjust the Customers balance

These representatively complex transactions illustrate common patterns:

##### Adjustments
Rollups provoke an important design choice: store the aggregate,
or sum things on the fly.  There are cases for both:
   - **Sum** - use sql `select sum` queries to add child data as required.
   This eliminates consistency risks with storing redundant data
   (i.e, the aggregate becomes invalid if an application fails to
   adjust it in *all* of the cases).
   
   - **Stored Aggregates** - a good choice when data volumes are large, and / or chain,
   since the application can **adjust** (make a 1 row update) the aggregate based on the
   *delta* of the children.

This design decision can dominate application coding.  It's nefarious,
since data volumes may not be known whn coding begins.  (Ideally, this can be
a "late binding" decision, like a sql index.)

The logic engine uses the **Stored Aggregate** approach.  This optimizes
multi-table update logic chaining, where updates to 1 row
trigger updates to other rows, which further chain to still more rows.

Here, the stored aggregates are `Customer.Balance`, and `Order.AmountTotal`
(a *chained* aggregate).  Consider the **ship / unship order** example:
* if `ShippedDate` *is not* altered, nothing is dependent on that,
so the rule is **pruned** from the logic execution.
The logic engine issues a 1-row update to the Order

* if `ShippedDate` *is* altered, the logic engine **adjusts** the `Customer.Balance`
with a 1 row update.
  * Contrast this to approaches in other systems where
the balance is recomputed with expensive aggregate queries over *all*
the customers' orders, and *all* their OrderDetails.

  *   Imagine, for example, a customer might have
   thousands of Orders, each with thousands of OrderDetails.

##### State Transition Logic (old values)
Logic often depends on the old and new state of a row.
For example, we need to adjust the Customers balance
if the Orders `ShippedDate` is changed.

##### DB-generated Keys
Observe the use of db-generated keys in `Order`
and `OrderDetail`.

### Explore
The [by-code](https://github.com/valhuber/python-rules/wiki/by-code)
and [by-rules](https://github.com/valhuber/python-rules/wiki/by-code)
approaches are described in the 
[wiki](https://github.com/valhuber/python-rules/wiki).


### Flask App Builder
You can also run an app (generated by [fab-quick-start](https://github.com/valhuber/fab-quick-start/wiki)), though this is not currently enforcing logic.

```
cd nw-app
export FLASK_APP=app
flask run
```
